ददृशिरे किल तत्क्षणमक्षत-
स्तनितजृम्भितकम्पितदिक्तटा: ।
सुषमया भवदङ्गतुलां गता
व्रजपदोपरि वारिधरास्त्वया ॥१॥
ददृशिरे किल	were seen indeed
तत्-क्षणम्-	(at) that moment
अक्षत-स्तनित-	continuously roaring
जृम्भित-कम्पित-	(and) spreading (and) causing to tremble
दिक्-तटा:	the quarters to their ends
सुषमया	in their brilliance
भवत्-अङ्ग-तुलां	Thy form in resemblance
गता:	attaining
व्रजपद-उपरि	above the land of Vraja
वारिधरा:-त्वया	rain clouds by Thee (were seen)
At that moment, indeed, above the land of Vraja, were seen by Thee massive rain clouds continuously roaring and spreading. They caused all the quarters to tremble and they resembled Thy form in their brilliance.
विपुलकरकमिश्रैस्तोयधारानिपातै-
र्दिशिदिशि पशुपानां मण्डले दण्ड्यमाने ।
कुपितहरिकृतान्न: पाहि पाहीति तेषां
वचनमजित श्रृण्वन् मा बिभीतेत्यभाणी: ॥२॥
विपुल-करक्-मिश्रै:-	huge hail stones accompanied by
तोय-धारा-निपातै:-	torrential rain fall
दिशि-दिशि	in all directions
पशुपानां मण्डले	(when) the cowherds' groups
दण्ड्य़माने	were being tormented
कुपित-	(from) angered
हरि-कृतात्-	Indra's actions
न: पाहि पाहि-	save, save us
इति तेषां वचनम्-	thus their words
अजित श्रृणवन्	O Invincible One! Hearing
मा विभीत-	do not be afraid
इति-अभाणी:	thus (Thou) said
There was torrential rain in all directions accompanied by huge enormous hail stones. The group of cowherds were tormented by the wrathful action of Indra. They all cried and prayed to be protected. O Invincible One! Hearing their laments , Thou asked them not to fear.
कुल इह खलु गोत्रो दैवतं गोत्रशत्रो-
र्विहतिमिह स रुन्ध्यात् को नु व: संशयोऽस्मिन् ।
इति सहसितवादी देव गोवर्द्धनाद्रिं
त्वरितमुदमुमूलो मूलतो बालदोर्भ्याम् ॥३॥
कुल इह	(for) the clan here
खलु गोत्र: दैवतं	indeed the mountain is the deity
गोत्र-शत्रो:-	the mountain enemy's
विहितम्-इह्	attack here
स रुन्ध्यात्	he will resist
क: नु व: संशय:-	what indeed is your doubt
अस्मिन् इति	in this, thus
सहसित-वादी	with a smile saying
देव	O Lord!
गोवर्द्धन-अद्रिम्	the Govardhana mountain
त्वरितम्-	quickly
उदमुमूल: मूलत:	uprooted from the roots
बाल-दोर्भ्याम्	with (Thy) two tender hands
Here, for our clan, the mountain is the deity. Indra is the enemy of mountains. This mountain, Govardhan, will resist Indra's attack. Indeed what is your doubt in this?' Thou said so with a smile. O Lord! Assuring them, Thou quickly uprooted the Govardhana mountain with Thy two tender arms.
तदनु गिरिवरस्य प्रोद्धृतस्यास्य तावत्
सिकतिलमृदुदेशे दूरतो वारितापे ।
परिकरपरिमिश्रान् धेनुगोपानधस्ता-
दुपनिदधदधत्था हस्तपद्मेन शैलम् ॥४॥
तदनु गिरिवरस्य	thereafter of (this) mountain
प्रोद्धृतस्य-	(which) was lifted up
अस्य तावत्	this then
सिकतिल-मृदु-देशे	on the soft sand bed
दूरत: वारित-आपे	which till far away was protected from water
परिकर-परिमिश्रान्	household articles, along with
धेनु-गोपान्-	cows and cowherds
अधस्तात्-	underneath
उपनिदधत्-	keeping
अधत्था:	(Thou) held aloft
हस्त-पद्मेन	with one lotus like arm
शैलम्	the mountain
Then Thou held aloft the lifted up mountain with Thy lotus like arm. The soft sand bed of the mountain was well protected from the rain water. The cows and cowherds all gathered under the uplifted mountain along with their belongings and were also well protected.
भवति विधृतशैले बालिकाभिर्वयस्यै-
रपि विहितविलासं केलिलापादिलोले ।
सविधमिलितधेनूरेकहस्तेन कण्डू-
यति सति पशुपालास्तोषमैषन्त सर्वे ॥५॥
भवति	(when) Thou
विधृत-शैले	were holding the mountain
बालिकाभि:	with the girls and
वयस्यै:-अपि	with the boys of Thy age group also
विहित-विलासं	with enthusiasm
केलि-लाप-आदि-लोले	in playful conversation etc engaging
सविध-मिलित-धेनू:-	near Thee gathered cows
एक-हस्तेन	with one hand
कण्डूयति सति	caressing
पशुपाला:-	the cowherds
तोषम्-ऐषन्त	satisfaction achieved
सर्वे	all of them
As Thou were holding the mountain, Thou enthusiastically engaged the girls and boys of Thy age group in playful conversation. The cows gathered around Thee and Thou caressed them with one hand. The cowherds were all very satisfied and delighted.
अतिमहान् गिरिरेष तु वामके
करसरोरुहि तं धरते चिरम् ।
किमिदमद्भुतमद्रिबलं न्विति
त्वदवलोकिभिराकथि गोपकै: ॥६॥
अतिमहान्	very big
गिरि:-एष	mountain this (is)
तु वामके	however in the left
कर-सरोरुहि	hand, lotus like
तं धरते चिरम्	this (mountain) (he) is holding for long
किम्-इदम्-	what this
अद्भुतम्-	wonder
अद्रि-बलं	(or) mountain's power
नु-इति	indeed (is it) thus
त्वत्-अवलोकिभि:-	by Thy onlookers
आकथि गोपकै:	was said by the cowherds
This mountain is so huge. Yet he is holding it in his left hand which is tender like a lotus stalk, for long. What a marvel! Is it that it is the power of the mountain to have lifted itself up?' The Gopas who were Thy onlookers commented thus.
अहह धार्ष्ट्यममुष्य वटोर्गिरिं
व्यथितबाहुरसाववरोपयेत् ।
इति हरिस्त्वयि बद्धविगर्हणो
दिवससप्तकमुग्रमवर्षयत् ॥७॥
अहह धार्ष्ट्यम्-	Oh! Arrogance
अमुष्य वटो:-	of this small boy
गिरिम् व्यथित-बाहु:-	the mountain (with) pained hands
असौ-अवरोपयेत्	this (mountain) will place back
इति हरि:-त्वयि	thus Indra in Thee
बद्ध-विगर्हण:	full of contempt
दिवस-सप्तकम्-	for seven days
उग्रम्-अवर्षयत्	heavily rained
Oh! The arrogance of this small boy! When his hands pain by the weight of the mountain, he will put it back in place.' Saying so Indra who was full of contempt for Thee poured rain heavily for seven days.
अचलति त्वयि देव पदात् पदं
गलितसर्वजले च घनोत्करे ।
अपहृते मरुता मरुतां पति-
स्त्वदभिशङ्कितधी: समुपाद्रवत् ॥८॥
अचलति त्वयि	(when) did not move Thou
देव	O Lord!
पदात् पदं	from Thy place, (even) one step
गलित-सर्व-जले	(and when) were exhausted all the waters
च घनोत्करे	and the clouds
अपहृते मरुता	(and when they) were dispersed by the winds
मरुतां पति:	the head of the gods Indra
त्वत्-अभिशङ्कित-धी:	(about) Thee (having) a doubtful mind
समुपाद्रवत्	fled
Thou had not stirred one step from Thy place. All the clouds were drained and exhausted of their waters. They were drifted away and scattered by the winds. Noticing all this, the head of the gods, Indra was scared of Thy might and fled.
शममुपेयुषि वर्षभरे तदा
पशुपधेनुकुले च विनिर्गते ।
भुवि विभो समुपाहितभूधर:
प्रमुदितै: पशुपै: परिरेभिषे ॥९॥
शमम्-उपेयुषि	subsiding (having) reached
वर्षभरे तदा	the heavy rain then
पशुप-धेनु-कुले	the cowherds and the cows
च विनिर्गते	had come out (from under the mountain)
भुवि विभो	on the ground O Lord!
समुपाहित-भूधर:	(Thee who) had placed the mountain
प्रमुदितै: पशुपै:	by the overjoyed cowherds
परिरेभिषे	were embraced
The heavy rain had then subsided and the cows and cowherds had come out from under the mountain. O Lord! Thou then replaced the mountain on the earth and were embraced by the overjoyed cowherds.
धरणिमेव पुरा धृतवानसि
क्षितिधरोद्धरणे तव क: श्रम: ।
इति नुतस्त्रिदशै: कमलापते
गुरुपुरालय पालय मां गदात् ॥१०॥
धरणिम्-एव पुरा	earth also itself, long ago
धृतवानसि	had lifted up (Thou)
क्षितिधर-उद्धरणे	in mountain lifting up
तव क: श्रम:	Thy what effort
इति नुत:-त्रिदशै:	thus praised by the gods
कमलापते	O Consort of Laxmi!
गुरुपुरालय	O Resident of Guruvaayur!
पालय मां गदात्	save me from ailments
O Consort of Laxmi! The gods praised Thee saying that long ago (in the incarnation of a Boar) Thou had lifted up the whole earth itself. Lifting up the mountain was not much of an effort for Thee. O Resident of Guruvaayur! Save me from ailments.